We are living in the last of the last days.
That means soon we are going to face events
that will test our integrity as never before.
Yes, now is the time
that we need to be alert and decisive.
Now, that’s a similar situation
to what our brothers
found themselves in in the first century.
Yes, they had some dramatic events
that faced them.
What were some of the events
that early Christians had to deal with,
and how did Jesus prepare them
to face those events?
And what does it mean for us today?
Well, first of all,
I’d like you to imagine this scene.
We’ll go back in time to Nisan 9, 33 C.E.
Do you remember what happened on that day?
Jesus was mounted on a donkey.
And in your mind, can you visualize it?
You’re with Jesus
as he starts to go down the area
on the Mount of Olives in the Kidron Valley,
and looking up toward the city of Jerusalem,
what happens?
The crowds start to gather
—more and more people.
People start throwing
their garments on the road;
others cut down branches
and wave them around.
They call out: “Blessed is the one
who comes in Jehovah’s name!”
The whole city is in an uproar!
How exciting that would have been!
And yet, at that exciting moment in his life,
Jesus started sobbing and crying.
Why?
Let’s turn to the record in Luke chapter 19
—Luke chapter 19
and verses 41 through 44.
And here the inspired account tells us
that “when [Jesus] got nearby,
“he viewed the city
“and wept over it,
“saying: ‘If you, even you,
had discerned on this day
“‘the things having to do with peace
“‘—but now they have been hidden
from your eyes.
“‘Because the days will come upon you
“‘when your enemies will build around you
a fortification of pointed stakes
“‘and will encircle you
and besiege you from every side.
“‘They will dash you
and your children within you to the ground,
“‘and they will not leave a stone
upon a stone in you,
because you did not discern
the time of your being inspected.’”
What do we see from these verses?
Do we see the compassion
Jesus had for those who would be killed
when Jerusalem was to be destroyed?
Yes, he was envisioning the destruction
that would occur in the year 70 C.E.
He was moved by the emotions of that
—so much so that he cried loudly,
not silently
(like he did when
he was about to resurrect Lazarus)
but audibly and loudly.
Now, what do we learn from this?
Well, for a start, we can see Jehovah’s love
for people as reflected in Jesus.
Jesus was very distraught
thinking about what would happen
to that city and its inhabitants.
And then in verse 44,
what was the other thing
that Jesus was distressed about?
That that was a time
of judgment, we might say, or inspection.
Yes, even though Jesus
was thinking ahead to future events,
he realized that they
were missing the opportunity at that time
to do something
—things that they needed to
do to prepare for the future.
There’s something else that we learn too.
Not only do we learn
from the compassion that Jesus displayed
(which we should likewise display
when we think about what’s
going to happen to this wicked world)
but also if Jesus
had so much emotion and feeling
about wicked people
who were about to be destroyed,
how do you think he felt about his followers?
Do you think he wanted to prepare them?
Of course.
And that’s why we’re not surprised
that two days later
he took aside his apostles
and gave them some instructions.
Let’s turn there to the record
in Luke 21:20-22.
Jesus is recorded as saying:
“However, when you see Jerusalem
surrounded by encamped armies
“[now in this case,
he’s referring to 66 C.E.],
“then know that the desolating
of her has drawn near.
“Then let those in Judea
begin fleeing to the mountains,
“let those in the midst of her
“[that is, in the midst of Jerusalem] leave,
“and let those in the countryside
“not enter into her
[or, enter into Jerusalem],
“because these are days
for meting out justice
in order that all the things
written may be fulfilled.”
Did you notice that there were three groups
of his followers that he was referring to?
He spoke about those who lived “in Judea,”
so that wasn’t just Jerusalem;
that was the surrounding area.
So they were told: ‘Get out of there.
Flee; go to the mountains.’
Then he spoke to those
who would be living in Jerusalem.
And what did he say?
‘Leave the city.’
And then the third group,
those who would live “in the countryside”
—we know many people were farmers,
and they lived in open areas,
doing agriculture.
Normally, what would be expected
is that if armies
were to come to a certain area,
these people would flee
into the fortified city.
So, what Jesus told them
to do was the opposite.
So no matter where his followers would be,
whether in the countryside,
in the city, or in the general area,
what was the common denominator?
Don’t flee to the city.
Don’t put your trust in Jerusalem.
Yes, Jesus was telling them
what they needed to know
before the events would occur.
Now, what really was the lesson
that Jesus was impressing on these ones?
Well, although those
he was speaking to at that time were Jewish,
they had to realize that Jerusalem
was no longer the earthly seat
of Jehovah’s Kingdom.
They had to also realize that the temple
was no longer
the center of Jehovah’s worship.
So Christians had to get those facts
clearly in mind
and make their decisions at that time,
prior to the events that would come later.
Now, maybe we could illustrate
in the modern sense.
Many of us have had to face the issue
with regard to blood transfusions.
When do you need to make your decision
with regard to that?
Is it when you’re in the ambulance,
semiconscious, in pain?
Is it, “Oh, give me the DPA;
can you read the fine print”?
Or is it when you get
into the emergency operating room
and you start arguing with people
and asking questions?
No.
We realize that now is the time
that we need to make our decisions.
Then we need to live by those decisions.
And then if an emergency should occur,
we’ll be ready for that situation.
That was the lesson Jesus was teaching them.
Yes, the Christians back in the first century
had to rid themselves
of any feelings of nationalistic pride,
any feelings that Jerusalem was the city.
Otherwise, they would make
the wrong decision.
This was especially true
in the year 66 C.E.
What happened in that year?
Well, let’s consider a brief overview.
Most of us are familiar with what happened
toward the end of 66 C.E.
At that time, the Roman army,
under the leadership of Cestius Gallus,
attacked Jerusalem.
But unexpectedly, they retreated,
allowing time for Christians in the city
to flee Jerusalem.
Was that the only thing that happened
in the year 66 C.E.?
No.
Let’s look back in time
to see what other events took place.
This will help us understand why Christians
needed to be alert and decisive beforehand.
First, let’s think about the background.
The Jewish nation was fed up
with Roman taxation and corruption
way back in Jesus’ day.
But by the beginning of 66 C.E.,
the situation was even worse.
The Roman governor of Judea, Gessius Florus,
was totally corrupt
and was notorious for his cruelty.
The spirit of rebellion was everywhere.
Judea was a powder keg ready to explode.
Around the spring of 66 C.E.,
Florus plundered the temple treasury in Jerusalem,
stealing some 17 talents.
This caused a revolt among the Jews.
In retaliation, Florus ordered his soldiers
to attack the rebels and allowed his soldiers
to plunder hundreds of homes
and to kill some 3,600 Jews.
However, the Roman assault was repelled,
and Florus and his men retreated from the city.
If you were there at that time,
how would you have reacted?
Would you have been outraged by Florus’ action?
If you lived in the countryside,
would you think the Romans may return
and now was the time to flee to Jerusalem?
Christians needed to be alert and decisive.
Remember,
Jerusalem was not important to Christians.
It was not the place of safety.
What happened next?
Eleazar, the son of High Priest Ananias,
gained control of the temple area.
He suspended the sacrifices offered to the emperor
and then drove the remaining Romans
out of the upper part of the city.
If you were there,
would you have been proud,
happy that the corrupt Romans
were forced to leave?
Remember, though,
Jerusalem was not important to Christians.
It was not the place of safety.
Christians needed to be alert
and decisive and not distracted.
Then around July/August,
Menahem, the leader of another Jewish faction,
overran the Roman fortress of Masada
and seized Roman weapons from there.
He then returned to Jerusalem
and captured the Tower, or Fortress, of Antonia.
They set fire to Herod’s palace,
the palaces of Agrippa and Bernice,
as well as High Priest Ananias’ home.
Then they ordered the murder
of High Priest Ananias and his brother Hezekiah.
Following that,
they returned to the Fortress of Antonia
and massacred the garrison
of Roman soldiers still there.
The city was divided and in an uproar,
so Menahem and his men
escaped back to Masada.
Do you see how easy it would have been
to join sides with one of the factions?
Remember, though, these events
were not important to Christians.
They needed to be alert and decisive
and not distracted.
Finally, around November,
Cestius Gallus, the governor of Syria,
marched with his troops
encamped about six miles from Jerusalem.
Even though it was a Sabbath day,
the Jewish rebels streamed out of the city
and made a hasty assault on the Romans.
The Romans retreated to Beth-horon,
and the Jews captured
Roman supplies and weapons.
Agrippa sent two representatives,
his personal friends,
to the Jewish rebels
to persuade them to lay down their weapons
and to promise them clemency.
But the rebels killed one of the men
and wounded the other.
Cestius pursued the rebels to Jerusalem,
camped at Mount Scopus for three days,
and then started to undermine the city wall
and tried to set fire to the gate of the temple.
But then, for some unexpected reason,
Gallus and his army retreated.
Alert Christians in Jerusalem and Judea
immediately acted decisively and fled.
The rebels chased the Roman army,
inflicting considerable losses
in both men and supplies,
and Gallus ordered his soldiers to retreat.
After seven days,
the Jewish rebels gave up chasing the Romans
and pillaged the supplies left behind.
They returned to Jerusalem after eight days.
What was the situation in Jerusalem at that time?
Josephus says:
“In [the] face of the exhilaration
“which now seized Jerusalem
“the spokesmen for peace [with Rome]
“were obliged to remain silent. . . .
“Even those opposed to the war
“were swept along by the force
of the circumstances.”
Those who supported Rome left.
“All the rest
“were won over to the side of the rebels,
partly by force, partly by persuasion.”
If you were there,
what would you have done?
Many Jews started to flee to Jerusalem,
seeking refuge there.
But was it a safe refuge?
No.
There was anarchy in the city.
Several Jewish political factions fought each other.
Eventually, in 70 C.E.,
Jerusalem was destroyed along with its temple.
But the Christians who were alert
and decisive were safe,
far away in Pella,
on the other side of the Jordan River.
What do we learn from this brief review
of the events of 66 C.E.?
It wasn’t just one event
—was it?—
but a series of events.
Were you amazed at how many events
occurred in 66 C.E.?
And that was just a brief summary.
There were many divisive political
and religious issues
that could have been
distracting to Christians.
So those Christians
needed to remain focused on their hope.
They needed to remember
that Jerusalem and its temple
gave no security for them.
Why should we be so interested
in all of this today?
Notice what else Jesus said,
as recorded at Luke chapter 21,
verses 34 through 36:
“Pay attention to yourselves
“that your hearts never become weighed down
“with overeating and heavy drinking
“and anxieties of life,
“and suddenly that day
“be instantly upon you as a snare.
“For it will come upon all those
“dwelling on the face of the whole earth.
“Keep awake, then,
“all the time making supplication
“that you may succeed in escaping
“all these things that must occur
and in standing before the Son of man.”
Jesus said that these things would occur
“on the face of the whole earth.”
That means he wasn’t just talking
about Christians in the first century;
he was talking about us today.
Yes, we need to pay attention and be alert.
He also reminded us to make supplication,
yes, to strengthen
our relationship with Jehovah.
What does this mean for us today?
As we face the great tribulation,
brothers and sisters,
we don’t know exactly
all the details of what will happen,
but we do know that Jesus did not mean
that we would have to flee
from one literal city
or go to a certain mountain range.
How could we?
We’re scattered
over the whole face of the earth.
But we do need to remember the same things
that the first-century Christians
needed to remember.
Don’t put our trust
in the religious
and political systems of Satan’s world.
Why is this so vital?
Just as in 66 C.E.,
today we see one event after another
leading up to the final day.
Everywhere there is evidence
of political instability and infighting
not only among nations
but also within nations.
Religious, political, and social issues
—including abortion and homosexuality—
have become divisive topics.
Scientific issues, such as global warming,
have also become political issues.
Just as in the first century,
we must take to heart Jesus’ warning:
Don’t take sides in the chaos
that’s happening all around us.
Yes, keep your focus on the Kingdom hope.
Remember, soon we will face events
that will test our integrity as never before.
So, what are the takeaway points?
Well, first of all, we realize
that now is the time we need
to make decisions
and stick to those decisions.
Yes, we need to be absolutely determined
not to put our faith
and trust in worldly politics.
We need to remain neutral,
always thinking of God’s Kingdom.
We also need to remember that it’s
not just one event coming up in the future.
It can be a series of events
all happening at the same time
that could be distracting.
But if we have made up our decision now,
we’ll be ready for that time.
And also we remember the need to keep
our relationship strong with Jehovah God.
And we remember the compassion of Jesus.
So Jehovah and Jesus want us
to be protected at that time.
So may we be determined
to continue to be alert and decisive!